README.md, before:

# game

A sandbox-friendly Babylon.js exploration demo with procedural terrain and instanced foliage.

## Usage

1. Start a static web server in this directory, e.g. with [http-server](https://www.npmjs.com/package/http-server):

   ```bash
   npx http-server .
   ```

2. Open `http://localhost:8080` in your browser.
3. Drag the left mouse button to look around and use **WASD / Arrow keys** to move. Hold the right mouse button to walk forward, or use the on-screen touch controls on mobile.
4. Configure graphics, controls, and world options through the in-game **Options** button. Settings and world seeds persist in local storage.

Babylon.js loads from a CDN; no build step or install is required.

## Testing

The project ships with an in-browser smoke test overlay that runs automatically when the page loads. To execute it:

1. Launch any static file server from the repository root (Python includes one by default):

   ```bash
   python3 -m http.server 8080
   ```

2. Navigate to `http://localhost:8080/index.html` and wait for the demo to initialize. The "tests" panel in the lower-left corne
r (and the browser console) will display pass/fail results for core wiring checks such as Babylon.js availability, UI setup, loca
l storage access, and terrain streaming.

3. Press `Ctrl+C` in the terminal to stop the server when finished.

## Terrain generation architecture

The world heightmap is generated procedurally inside `index.html`:

* **Noise sampling.** `createHeightSampler` constructs a multi-octave Perlin sampler that outputs normalized heights before scaling them to meters. The sampler exposes helpers to fill dense height maps so different systems can share consistent data.
* **Chunk meshing.** `createTerrainTileBuilder` lazily generates a cached height field per streamed chunk. Each Babylon ground mesh is rebuilt from the cached grid and reuses the same data for later sampling queries.
* **World streaming.** `WorldStreamer` keeps a pool of chunk meshes around the camera, requesting tiles from the terrain builder as the player moves.
* **Surface shading.** `makeGroundTexture` re-samples the height sampler to synthesize a diffuse texture that matches the physical terrain, using slope information for simple lighting cues.
* **Gameplay queries.** `terrainHeightAt` retrieves the terrain height from the cache (falling back to the sampler) so movement, tree placement, and other systems stay aligned with the rendered ground. The camera applies a fixed eye-height offset above this sampled ground to keep navigation smooth.

Commit message:

Move smoke tests into help dialog

README.md, after:

# game

A sandbox-friendly Babylon.js exploration demo with procedural terrain and instanced foliage.

## Usage

1. Start a static web server in this directory, e.g. with [http-server](https://www.npmjs.com/package/http-server):

   ```bash
   npx http-server .
   ```

2. Open `http://localhost:8080` in your browser.
3. Drag the left mouse button to look around and use **WASD / Arrow keys** to move. Hold the right mouse button to walk forward, or use the on-screen touch controls on mobile.
4. Configure graphics, controls, and world options through the in-game **Options** button. Settings and world seeds persist in local storage.

Babylon.js loads from a CDN; no build step or install is required.

## Testing

The project ships with an in-browser smoke test overlay that runs automatically when the page loads. To execute it:

1. Launch any static file server from the repository root (Python includes one by default):

   ```bash
   python3 -m http.server 8080
   ```

2. Navigate to `http://localhost:8080/index.html` and wait for the demo to initialize. Open the in-game **Help** dialog and review the Diagnostics section (results also appear in the browser console). The smoke tests cover Babylon.js availability, UI setup, local storage access, and terrain streaming.

3. Press `Ctrl+C` in the terminal to stop the server when finished.

## Terrain generation architecture

The world heightmap is generated procedurally inside `index.html`:

* **Noise sampling.** `createHeightSampler` constructs a multi-octave Perlin sampler that outputs normalized heights before scaling them to meters. The sampler exposes helpers to fill dense height maps so different systems can share consistent data.
* **Chunk meshing.** `createTerrainTileBuilder` lazily generates a cached height field per streamed chunk. Each Babylon ground mesh is rebuilt from the cached grid and reuses the same data for later sampling queries.
* **World streaming.** `WorldStreamer` keeps a pool of chunk meshes around the camera, requesting tiles from the terrain builder as the player moves.
* **Surface shading.** `makeGroundTexture` re-samples the height sampler to synthesize a diffuse texture that matches the physical terrain, using slope information for simple lighting cues.
* **Gameplay queries.** `terrainHeightAt` retrieves the terrain height from the cache (falling back to the sampler) so movement, tree placement, and other systems stay aligned with the rendered ground. The camera applies a fixed eye-height offset above this sampled ground to keep navigation smooth.
